Welcome to one of the world's most
geologically active islands.
There's boiling water billowing out of
the ground. This is not normal. You
don't just live on the land here, you
negotiate with it.
Just spurts up, releases into the sky.
Oh, that timing.
At which point it immediately TURNS INTO
STEAM.
OH, NO, IT DOESN'T.
[Music]
My name is Professor Hannah Fry.
A mathematician and writer with a
lifelong habit following my curiosity.
Especially when things are deeply
deliciously interesting.
Kitchen yoga for you.
>> Yes.
Dionysus would approve.
Some people travel to see the world.
I travel to question the forces that
shape the entire nation.
Welcome to South Korea. I wanted to come
here for their optimal urban planning.
It sort of feels quite chaotic, I'll be
honest with you.
I want to meet the people with
unexpected stories to tell. I cannot
imagine going through that as a young
boy. No.
And dig up the peculiar and wonderful
treasures that reveal what a country is
made of.
I'm looking at it and thinking, what
beautiful geometry.
[Music]
This is my way to make sense of what
makes our world go round.
[Music]
Marooned in the North Atlantic between
North America and mainland Europe,
Iceland feels like the edge of the
world.
A stark, treeless wilderness
born of fire
and sculpted by ice.
This island is less than 20 million
years old. It's basically a geological
toddler.
But humans are newcomers to this story.
Just over a millennium ago, a few
thousand Vikings and Celts began to
carve out the beginnings of a nation.
As far as the planet goes, Iceland is
this total anomaly. It's It's basically
what happens if you take a bunch of
people, stick them on a floating lava
field, and then just leave them alone
for a thousand years. It definitely
shouldn't work. Yet this island of
roughly 400,000 people punches well
above its weight on the world stage,
drawing millions of visitors each year,
pioneering clean energy, and rewriting
the rule book with its progressive
politics.
Here they are, not just thriving, but
exporting their culture, their high-end
technology, even their yogurt to the
rest of the world.
What is it about living on an exploding
rock in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean
that has made Icelandic people this way?
And that question brings me to the
Reykjanes Peninsula, where that volcanic
temperament is quite literally bubbling
to the surface. Even the name of the
place comes with a warning. Reykjanes
means smoking point. This stretch of
land straddles the boundary between two
tectonic plates, making it home to no
less than five active volcano systems
with an ocean of lava sitting just
beneath the surface.
Those plates are pulling apart at around
2 cm a year, and the landscape is
scarred with the evidence. Except
they're not drifting gently and
politely. Movement builds up stress in
the rock, which holds tension for
centuries and then rips apart.
So, for the residents in the fishing
town of Grindavik that sits on top of
the boundary, life is mostly quiet
until it isn't.
[Music]
So, did you have a good flight? It was,
yeah, very I mean, the landing was um
you know, windy. Windy yesterday, yeah.
It was actually a yellow warning. Local
engineer Horn knows firsthand what can
happen when the earth opens up without a
warning. Perfect. Thank you very much.
She's working with her colleague Jón
inside the local sports hall, where on
the 10th of November, 2023, it wasn't
football that provided the drama.
Yeah, we'll go down, I think. Oh my
gosh. Should we have a have a look?
Oh, wow.
>> Wow.
That's something. You can really see how
it's like the earth being ripped apart.
>> Exactly.
The chasm, around 20 m deep in parts,
opened up in less than 24 hours.
What actually happened then? Like, there
was a day when this was just a normal
sports hall. Yeah, actually. Not long
ago. Uh most people just describe it as
they were sitting the whole day on a on
a top of a of a boiling pot on a stove.
So, it was constant rumbling. You're so
chill about this. You're so like, I'm
sorry, a hole opened up in the middle of
the earth. That's what's happened when
you have a country that is constantly
being spread apart. You eventually have
to open up a hole.
Over the course of 3 days, cracks and
holes appeared all over town.
Small earth movements aren't unusual
here, but this was something else
entirely.
A sign that the region had entered a far
more volatile phase of seismic activity.
So, after it appears, it filled up all
this tension, and then you get this
period where tension is released. So, we
are now in that period. And that would
take like, you know, 3 to 500 years. But
it's not continuous flow.
The signs of Iceland's explosive
temperament aren't hard to find. So,
Horn is taking me 3 km north across the
ancient lava fields for a closer look.
It sort of almost extraterrestrial, this
landscape.
Yes. Incredible. Like the cracks in
Grindavik, this lava is the handiwork of
Iceland's 800-year-old
mood swings.
This is lava from the last period, the
period from 1210 to 1240.
As the tectonic plates slowly pull
apart, cracks form. Some breaking the
surface, while others open underground.
Shifting pressure drives magma upward,
widening the cracks, until the ground
gives way and lava bursts through the
surface.
I don't know if you can see
the steam that's coming off the
landscape back there, and then the spout
that's right next to it. So, a few
months ago, that opened up and it was
spewing out hot lava from the earth.
The latest cycle of volcanic activity
started in 2021,
and the peninsula hasn't had much of a
breather since. 12 eruptions and
counting, which is a bit of a problem
given that this area is the most densely
populated region in the country.
You won't have any
hope
of understanding how that lava is going
to flow down this terrain. You need some
very delicious physics models and
equations to be able to do that.
It is Horn's job to calculate where and
when those eruptions are likely to
start, and what the impact of them might
be.
No easy task, but because red-hot molten
lava moves like a liquid, she can borrow
equations used to model how rivers flow.
With a few volcanic tweaks to forecast
where lava might travel.
And in November 2023, Horn's model put
Grindavik at risk of being buried by
lava.
So, she designed a network of defensive
barriers, shielding the power station,
protecting the town,
and also the world-famous Blue Lagoon
spa, heated, ironically, by the same
magma that was threatening to destroy
it.
Construction started in November,
but then the first eruption was in
December.
It was basically a race against time
when we were doing this.
They worked around the clock, moving 2
and 1/2 million cubic meters of soil,
rock, and old lava to build over 12 km
of defensive barriers.
But they were up against over 150
million cubic meters of lava.
Look at that.
It goes over the road. And everyone that
was going to the Blue Lagoon before this
happened drove this road.
Six eruptions in 9 months left huge
swaths of the peninsula swamped in lava,
in some places piling up to 35 m thick.
You can really get a sense of the crust
on the top that formed and cooled and
then cracked like a big slab of it
there. You kind of got the layers where
some bits have stayed liquid for longer.
And here you can see this part here has
been squeezed out, Amazing.
>> making this very beautiful form. But
that also must be part of what makes it
difficult to predict if it's like sort
of solid, sort of liquid.
>> Exactly. There's no guarantees. No. Mm.
Each eruption gave Horn more data to
refine her lava flow models.
[Music]
You can see here the fissure. Okay.
And we can see the simulation.
And you can see the outlines, that is
the actual outline of the Where it ended
up.
>> Yes. No way. But this this is
>> amazing.
>> Yeah, it is.
When you say, okay, this is where the
barrier needs to be, this is how high it
needs to be, this is where it needs to
go." Is everybody just like, "Okay,
yeah, on board?" In the beginning, we
didn't know exactly what to expect. Many
people thought that the lava wouldn't
reach this far. The wonderful Blue
Lagoon wanted to have their hotel and
the Blue Lagoon open and everything, and
we understand that.
In November 2024, the earth split just 4
km away, sending lava surging towards
the iconic beauty spot, destroying
everything in its path.
Within 24 hours, it had reached the car
park.
Some buildings were damaged, but Horn's
barriers held.
The flow was largely contained.
You saved the Blue Lagoon from being
destroyed.
>> you know, it would have passed through,
yeah.
So, yeah.
>> Did you feel a little bit like going,
"Told you so." I'd be down there being
like, "Thank you. Thank me." Yeah, but I
haven't said anything.
Even with people like Horn helping to
minimize the damage, there are probably
centuries more eruptions on the cards.
Everyone here knows they're just going
to have to keep their shovels handy. The
thing about this patch of earth is that
it is giving these
regular, quite violent reminders of our
place in the world.
And I think that Icelandic people just
feel that more than the rest of us.
There is something about this mindset
that runs deep.
After all, the last big volcanic cycle
began only a few hundred years after the
first settlers arrived.
And luckily for us,
we don't have to guess what they made of
it, because the Icelandic are the sort
of people who like to write things down.
A thousand or so years ago, this
freezing rock in the middle of the
Atlantic, far from any other
civilizations,
somehow had a certain appeal.
There was land to claim, seas to fish,
and a strategic base from which to go
forth and explore the rest of the world.
In short, enough to tempt thousands of
Viking settlers from Scandinavia in the
9th century.
They stopped off in Ireland and
Scotland, abducting and enslaving women
and some men to take to their
destination.
And of all of the places they
discovered, there was one that held
particular significance. 80 km northeast
along the dramatic fault line that
splits the country in two,
is Thingvellir.
You have to imagine all of these Viking
men and Celtic women coming across this
incredible site. They thought it was
trolls that'd been sort of frozen in
time.
Legends and trolls aside, what they did
next was surprisingly democratic.
This is a group of people outside of the
rule of Europe. And so, after they've
been here about 60 years or so, in 930
AD, they decide they're not going to
appoint a king. They're going to have a
whole bunch of chieftains instead.
The chieftains had a yearly gathering
known as the Althing, where they settled
disputes and declared new laws. And as
for where to put their parliament, they
put it here, because it acts as this
perfect natural amphitheater.
Hello.
All those in favor, raise your axes.
Most of medieval Europe ran on monarchy,
bloodlines, and the occasional
beheading. But Iceland, left to its own
devices, chose something different.
Debate, law, collective rule.
And what's even more surprising than the
existence of the Althing is how much we
know about it.
Even though the site itself was left
almost entirely unmarked, the stories
survived, passed down and written out
generation after generation.
Which makes a lot more sense when you
get to the capital Reykjavik, 40 km
away.
It is home to around 140,000 residents,
a rich Viking heritage, and enough
bookshops to make a librarian weep with
happiness.
I think that 50% of the stuff in my
house is books.
What I'm looking for are copies of the
Icelandic sagas.
A series of 42 manuscripts that tell the
lives and adventures and dramas of the
island's early settlers.
Some are quick little fables, others
hundreds of pages, and they are unlike
any other books of the time.
All of these sagas, they were written
down in the 13th and 14th century. And
this was the time when the rest of
Europe was, you know, busy copying out
the Bible or writing other religious
texts. But because Iceland was
relatively isolated from all of that,
they were just free to write down
stories about normal people but in Norse
rather than in Latin.
The Althing is brought vividly to life
with descriptions of how each summer
people trekked miles to camp at the rock
and hear laws being recited.
And then, of course, there's the drama
of daily life of those early settlers.
The sagas are stories of honor and of
revenge and of land disputes and blood
killings. Now, it's sort of like if Game
of Thrones was set among sheep farmers.
That's the sort of vibe.
There was almost certainly some creative
license, but most of the sagas were
grounded in real events.
One describes a volcanic eruption so
vividly, ash blanketing the sky for
almost a year, that people thought it
was a punishment from the gods.
[Music]
And because these tales and Icelandic
law were recorded in the local language,
an unusually high number of people also
learned to read. But these aren't just
stories from the past, they're still
shaping how Icelanders see themselves.
And if you want to understand that
legacy, it helps to meet someone who
lives it. This way? A real-life modern
Viking, or at least
someone who dresses like one.
Local tour guide Hordur wants to show me
his view of the country. So, this is
going to be your horse.
This is Eyjólfur. She's absolutely
beautiful.
Hordur's horses are the direct
descendants of those brought over by
Iceland's earlier settlers. You're a
good boy. So, I'm going to be full
Viking. Can I have a cape as well? Yes,
you can.
I mean, if we're going to do the saga,
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> properly, right?
So, now I'm going to take you to the
most beautiful place in Iceland.
>> Yeah. Yes. I mean, I'll be honest with
you, that is a tough ask, right? Because
the bar is high.
We are starting at Landeyjarsandur,
a stunning 80 km of volcanic black sand.
This is beautiful. No one here. No one
here. No tracks, nothing. It's
incredible.
There's a lot of reference in the sagas
about reading into nature,
animals. A lot of that is, of course,
lost in a modern life, etc. But I like
to think that we are still here.
I mean, you sort of are living quite a
similar life. I know you've got Wi-Fi at
Of course, the sagas weren't just about
nature or volcanic doom and gloom. They
also included those stories of the
traditional Viking pastimes of raiding
and murder.
The clan of families, they gathered 99
riders, and they come riding down the
river that we just rode. Right. Uh this
farm was more or less built like a
fortress, so they could defend
themselves.
>> Mhm.
Resulting in that the attackers could
fire on them.
In the farm. What, they burned it down?
>> Yes. And that's kind of
>> inside?
>> Yes. So,
>> Oh. that's, of course, the cowardless
way a Viking can kill anybody.
It might not look like much, but then
again, neither did the parliament, and
that didn't stop it shaping a nation.
What is your connection to these stories
like, emotionally? You know, I am very
appreciated to be sort of part of this
even today.
We do not have the palaces here. We do
not have the bridges, but what we do
have, we have our sagas.
Like the stories are your castles. Yes,
exactly. Yeah. Exactly. That's true,
actually, cuz there aren't these ancient
ruins like you find in other places.
>> But you do have the stories.
>> Yeah.
Iceland's literary legacy continues.
This is a country where writing novels
is practically a national sport. It has
been said one in 10 Icelanders will
publish a book in their lifetime.
And their habit of storytelling to
explain, connect, and imagine doesn't
just fill bookshelves. It has helped to
steer their country through some
turbulent times. You've better control
of your horse than I do, I think.
I strongly suspect it might be the
animal. Rather than the human.
Iceland might be a land of fire, but it
is just as much a world of ice. 1/10 of
the country is buried beneath glaciers.
The largest ice cap of all is
Vatnajökull.
It spreads for thousands of square
kilometers. And near the mouth of the
ocean, the ice slowly breaks into a
frozen lagoon that tells a story of
modern Iceland.
[Music]
Over a million people visited the
glacier last year, which is quite a
feat, given that the whole of Iceland
only had 300,000 visitors two decades
ago.
Let me take you back to 2008. The The
financial crisis has just happened, and
Iceland is not doing well.
And that is because at the time
Iceland's economy relied heavily on
banking and financial services,
and they fell hard. Three national banks
go under, and their GDP drops by 7%.
As the krona collapsed, import costs
rose, and even more businesses folded.
And then, just 2 years later, that
volcano that no one can pronounce
erupts, shutting down all of air traffic
across Europe. Iceland is right there,
present on people's televisions, in
people's minds, and not in a good way.
But rather than bailing out the banks as
many other countries did, Iceland let
the system collapse,
and then use the rubble to build
something new.
And that is the moment that they decide
to do one of the best PR jobs in
history.
>> It's amazing, really.
Have a look at this, yeah? They start
putting out adverts featuring real
Icelandic people and their
slightly wry, slightly unusual sense of
humor, demonstrating the beauty of their
landscape in order to encourage
tourists.
By today's standards, these videos might
seem quaint, but back then they were a
revelation. They lit up the internet.
The whole country played along, and it
became one of the very first things to
go viral in the days when social media
was still just finding its feet.
[Music]
It totally works.
We know that you want to experience it
all like a local. These clips are often
credited with kick-starting the
Icelandic tourist boom.
Awesome. By 2024, visitors outnumber the
locals nearly six to one, and tourism
supplied almost 40% of export earnings,
which, by the way, is about five times
more than any other European country.
Tranquil local oddities like this
glacial lagoon are now world-famous, but
the crowds aren't the only new thing
around here. The lagoon itself didn't
even exist 100 years ago. Hello.
That's so cool.
And park rangers Susanna and Þor
Halldórsson are witnesses to these
latest changes.
This gigantic hunk of ice that's just
bobbing around, and that's because it's
melting as it's going, right?
>> Yeah.
So, the ice is kind of blue when it's
really compact, and then when the sun is
shining on it, makes like these holes
that it's melting.
So, a lot of this has come from the
glacier itself? Yes. The glacier was at
its biggest at 1890,
and after that it started to retreat.
And the lagoon, yeah, formed in 1930.
It looks like it's melting.
Have you guys worked out how long it
will be there for? At this rate they are
melting right now, it's going to be
around 100 years. Wow.
How do Icelandic people feel about
the loss of the glaciers? They're pretty
sad, of course. Also, because the
glaciers, they put a lot of pressure on
the the land, and we have volcanoes
under the ice cap, and then when we lose
the ice cap, then
uh there is more
>> eruptions.
>> Yeah.
volcanic activity.
So, yeah, that's what
um people are worried about. Is there
something like a tiny bit ironic about
us sitting on this lagoon and talking
about the effects of climate change and
the retreating glacier, and then there's
being boatloads of tourists getting on
arriving in their diesel-powered
coaches?
>> Yeah.
There was this presentation that we used
to do
when we were talking to people like,
"What can we do? Nobody can do
everything, but everybody can do
something." And then we kind of ended it
with like, "And it's really good to
travel less."
But also, please come to Iceland.
Yeah. Yeah.
Climate change is an unsentimental foe,
but the Icelandic response begins with a
well-known phrase, something that
demonstrates their characteristically
humorous way of coping.
We've always had to just get on with it,
no matter what situations we are in,
volcanoes, weather. Þetta reddast. Just
figure out a way, basically. Do you
think that that's part of this story?
Yeah. Þetta reddast. Yes, that's
everybody's mantra. Þetta reddast in
Iceland. Everything will work itself
out.
No one here pretends to have a solution
to climate change. They're just doing
what has, by necessity, become a bit of
a habit for the people who live here,
learning to outlast trouble.
I think there is
something quite Icelandic about that,
you know? Like,
dealing with the hand that you've been
given and trying to make the most of
what you've got.
Getting through hardship shows grit, but
there is another test of character for
the people of this country.
What do you do when the resources keep
coming?
Iceland isn't the easiest place to call
home, and not just because of the
eruptions, the earthquakes, and
glaciers.
In winter, the temperature here drops to
well below freezing, and daylight lasts
barely four or five hours.
And that's the good bit.
Almost everybody in Iceland, they live
around the edge of the country, and
that's because in the middle
the soil is so porous, it's volcanic
rock, right? That the rain just drains
right through it, and nothing can grow.
That leaves 3/4 of the country as
practically inhospitable.
But what lies beneath the rock is far
more welcoming.
This is Hellisheiðarvirkjun, where a
massive power station plugs straight
into the planet's heating system.
Normally, when you see big plumes coming
out of a power station, you're like,
"Woah, that looks like terrible
pollution." But um
here it's just water.
Well, 99.63% of it.
And what they're doing here is they
they've drilled down 3 km into the
earth, where is this giant reservoir of
water, extremely hot water because of
all of the magma that's moving along
underneath it.
And when they drill that hole, this
water then comes up under high pressure,
and as it emerges at the surface, turns
into steam in a flash, which is what
they use to power the steam turbines,
giving them free, unlimited electricity.
Maybe not free, but definitely very
cheap.
Until the 1970s, Iceland ran almost
entirely on imported oil. But then
global prices skyrocketed, and they had
a rethink and turned to geothermal and
hydroelectric power to warm itself
instead.
Fast forward to today, and 100% of
Iceland's electricity comes from
sustainable resources. You can find
crops thriving in huge greenhouses, and
geothermal water heats 90% of homes. In
Reykjavik, the leftovers are even
directed under the streets to keep them
ice-free in winter.
Call it underfloor heating for an entire
city.
But it turns out that abundant energy
changes habits as well as heating bills.
And apparently, the farm next door is a
case in point. All right, we're all set.
Even though Kiddi, who runs operations
here, is
not exactly your typical farmer.
We're going to go and look at Godzilla
and King Kong.
Yeah, because they're absolute monsters.
And
here they are. They're pretty cool,
right?
>> Really cool.
Godzilla and King Kong are tanks filled
with algae,
hundreds of kilos of it, mixed with salt
water and infused with carbon dioxide
bubbles supplied by the power station
next door.
So, is the algae in here?
>> Yeah.
Kiddi believes microalgae have an
important role to play in the
sustainability of food production.
What is it that's special about algae?
For aquaculture and food production,
most of what you're growing is
infrastructure, because you don't eat
the roots, you don't eat the stems.
>> A little bit of corn at the end, maybe.
Exactly.
Algae, they are single-cellular
organisms. We can use 100% of the
biomass.
The farm can produce up to 150 tons of
microalgae a year, using up to 500 times
less water, and 1 and 1/2 thousand times
less land than traditional crops. And
it's harvested year-round. No seasons,
no pause button.
How are you powering it?
The power plant was here first, and then
we created the system around
everything that this power plant has to
offer.
The power plant supplies the cold water
for the algae to sit in, and the energy
to run lights perfectly tuned to the
exact wavelengths it thrives on.
Even the power plant's waste carbon
dioxide is put to good use, feeding the
algae to lock it inside.
So, it's unbelievably clean.
It's not even carbon neutral, it's
carbon negative.
>> It's carbon negative. This is a food
source with impeccable green
credentials, and the spirulina algae in
these tanks isn't just sustainable, it's
as protein-rich as meat, packed with
fiber, good fats, vitamins, and
minerals. There is nothing not to love.
Oh, wait. Apart from one tiny thing.
The problem with spirulina is it tastes
bad and it smelled
even worse.
I mean, you're really selling it. But
Kjartan has thought about this and he
washes his algae in pure Icelandic water
to get rid of the unpalatable elements.
[Music]
It doesn't taste of anything. I don't.
There's no taste. There's an extremely
weird texture. It is like eating mud.
To eat this say there's room for
improvement.
For now, spirulina is a protein
supplement, but one day it could be a
meat alternative.
Do you think there's something quite
Icelandic about this endeavor?
It's
ridiculously Icelandic. If something
goes bad, we're just going to fix it and
we're going to make it better and that,
I believe, is very Icelandic. I I sort
of wonder where that comes from. I mean,
what do you think it is about
Icelandic people that makes them have
that level of grit?
We're a tiny little nation, but still we
believe that we can do things that
cannot be done anywhere else in the
world.
This attitude is working. Power-hungry
businesses are flocking here. Like
aluminum processing, where nearly 40% of
the product cost comes from the
electricity needed to create it.
That means big profits and away from the
mood swings of global fuel market, the
country is building on a stable economic
base. There is something really unusual
going on here. I mean, if you think as a
country, you you have just unlimited
access to this very clean energy source.
I mean, that does really change the
equation. Whereas in other countries,
you'd have to worry about pollution and
and the expensive it. I think here you
you have that freedom to be a bit more
creative.
To, you know, try out these
honestly quite wacky innovations.
[Music]
And that has given Iceland power on the
world stage, exporting their geothermal
expertise to countries like Kenya and
China.
But it's not only energy where Iceland
is achieving where many other nations
struggle.
They are also making waves in shaping a
fairer society.
[Music]
With nearly 5,000 km of coastline,
fishing isn't just a tradition here,
it's a way of life. And here in Riff,
the catch comes with a twist.
If I know anything about Iceland, it's
this. They really like fish and it's
very cold. And that means they spend a
lot of time in these little boats
absolutely freezing. Especially in
winter when it's incredibly violent,
it's incredibly risky and um
to be honest, not the kind of place that
you would normally expect to find a
woman.
But this is Iceland. Back in the 1920s,
a group of fisherwomen from the town of
Siglufjörður formed a women's union.
They were known as the herring girls and
they didn't just gut fish. They
organized marches, protests and a
historic moment that saw 90% of
Iceland's women go on strike.
Even housewives joined in. Many dropped
the kids off at their husbands'
workplaces and left. And it turns out,
nothing focuses a nation like an office
full of toddlers.
This was the 24th of October, 1975 and
it was a disaster. Shops had to shut
down, banks had to close, fish factories
had to stop doing their work and all the
men just didn't know what to do with
themselves. Sales of sausages went
through the roof and they decided to
call it the long Friday because of how
insufferable it was to live through. It
was a turning point that changed
Icelandic society forever.
In 1980, the nation elected Vigdís
Finnbogadóttir, a divorced single
mother, as its leader.
Iceland became the first country in the
world to democratically elect a female
president.
They have been very good at keeping up
the pressure. So, on the anniversary of
the great women's day off, as they call
it,
they demonstrate the pay gap by walking
out of work at the moment when a man
would hit a woman's daily earnings. In
2005, this was 2:08 p.m. By 2010, got to
2:25 p.m. And by 2016, it was 2:38 p.m.
Plan is, hopefully, that they'll stay
for a full day by 2030.
Okay, it is not perfect. But for the
last 15 years, Iceland has led the world
in gender equality rankings.
>> Lovely to meet you. And fisherwoman Dora
is still pushing things forward.
[Music]
So, do you have the same boat for years?
Yeah, it's like it's the same year as I
was born. Really? It's like we have the
same age. 84?
82. So, I'm turning 43. That's a shock.
For the last 13 years, Dora has
captained her family's fishing business.
And today, she's helping me find my sea
legs.
Oh my gosh. Try to imagine being out on
the ocean in this. It's like I can
imagine this being very scary in bad
weather.
Historically, women working in the
fishing industry is nothing new, but
very few take on the top job of captain.
There are some girls that have taken the
license, but haven't taken the step to
go out by themselves. Yeah. And I'm
always like
patting them up to do it.
But finally, we do it and and people
listen to us.
And today, it is me listening to Dora.
So, now we are going to see if we can
catch any fish today. So, we need to put
this one down. One of the hooks one by
one. Okay.
Are there rules about how much you're
allowed to fish? I only can fish like
750 kilos a day of cod. So, 750 kilos?
>> Yeah. With just these two? No, I have
four.
I don't think I'm in any danger of
reaching my fishing quotas.
But fishing prowess here shouldn't come
as a surprise. In a country that juggles
volcanoes and glaciers and weather with
an attitude problem, people get good at
staying afloat, literally and otherwise.
We are isolated. Everybody had to go out
and work. We haven't stopped fighting
for ourselves and like proving there no
man jobs and woman job. Where do you
think that attitude comes from then?
Maybe from the Vikings or something.
The fighting
in our blood. Never stop fighting.
The same spirit now powers the economy.
75% of women work, much higher than the
European average, which is 51.
I think we have a fish. Yeah, you have
to be strong.
All the way up. Today, 58% of university
graduates here are women and the
parliament is almost a 50/50 split.
>> Hang on, these gloves are too big for
me. Yeah, you got to work with what you
have. What was the phrase? Þetta
reddast. There you go.
Dora is one of the many women here
pushing the boundaries in search for
equality.
You have to kiss him. I'm going to kiss
him. Yeah. And let him go. Yeah.
Yeah? You have to do it. Okay.
It's a tradition.
Okay. Bye-bye, little guy.
He lives to see another day. I'm not
sure the fish enjoyed that. I know I
didn't.
Dora's version of community is all heart
and hard work and in Iceland, that
spirit runs deep.
Because as it turns out, they are a
nation connected in more ways than most.
When the first
bathing, relaxing and swapping gossip.
And to be honest, not a lot has changed.
So, I am making a stop at Iceland's
oldest swimming pool
and I'm meeting local Elma, who has
spent a lot of time tracing the roots of
Icelandic identity,
starting with her family tree.
I've tried to trace my family history
and I can go back maybe three or four
generations, but there's something
different here, right? Yeah, I think my
father actually traced well more than
thousand years
A thousand years?
>> Yes. It's a hobby for many Icelandic
people, so I think we have a lot of
registrations, church books where
everything was written down. Very
valuable information regarding
where we come from. That is kind of
extraordinary though, that you have a
country of people
who all understand how they're
interconnected with one another.
On a remote island with a shared
ancestry, no one asks if you're related,
just how recently.
I'm not suggesting that, you know,
you're cousins with everybody in
Iceland.
But in a way, you sort of are. Yes, we
are. Yeah. I mean, I'm related to my
husband. Are you? Yeah.
I mean, if you do end up marrying your
second cousin, third cousin, fourth
cousin, does it have the same sort of
stigma attached to it? No.
Well, second, yes, but fourth, No. I
mean,
how could we?
We would just all be walking in shame,
wouldn't we?
I mean,
people check. Do they? Yeah. How? It's
the I Íslendingabók.
The book of
Icelanders.
It is named after a medieval saga of
family lineages, which is fitting since
it now contains over a million of them.
Launched in 2003, it is a publicly
available database that gives Icelanders
the ultimate ancestry cheat sheet.
So, okay, if I just write my husband
In a country this size, it doesn't take
much. A name, a birthday, and suddenly
you have mapped out a whole bloodline.
So, your father and then back one
generation, two generations, you know,
you know, you know Yeah. But eight
generations back, you share ancestors.
Yeah. Wow, so actually in the 1800s, you
shared a relative. Yeah. It's not that
long ago. No. But enough that you don't
need to worry about your genetics.
Absolutely.
While being slightly related to everyone
might make dating a little awkward, it
does have its upsides. Because as far as
scientists like population geneticist
Elisa are concerned, it means Iceland
has a DNA dataset that is unlike
anywhere else on Earth.
Why does studying the Icelandic
population give you more of an advantage
than studying, I don't know, just like a
a sample of people from anywhere else?
There are a few things that come
together to make this a really valuable
study system. Iceland has a really
unique genetic history because you don't
have a lot of genetic variation entering
the population and everyone sort of come
from the same source.
>> Cuz they all have the same history.
>> Yes, exactly. I see. Because the
Icelandic population has endured famine
and natural disasters, you have this um
series of contractions in the population
that then leads to this genetic
homogeneousness where everyone's
Very similar.
>> similar to each other and so the
differences really stand out. So, is it
almost like the Icelandic
population sort of acts as its own
control group?
>> Yeah, yeah, exactly. And with this
natural control group, it is much easier
to link specific genes to different
diseases.
One of the main goals is to find
variants that give us clues into how we
can treat diseases. So, things like
Alzheimer's or heart disease or
schizophrenia. So, you might take a
bunch of families where Alzheimer's is
not present and compare them to a group
of families where Alzheimer's is present
and try to find variants that are on
higher frequency in one group than in
another group.
This can accelerate the speed of
discovery for diseases like Alzheimer's.
Genes linked to which have already been
found in the Icelandic population. If we
can target the product of a gene that we
know is connected to Alzheimer's,
um
then we have a treatment for this
condition. A treatment not just for
people here, but all around the world. I
mean, this is quite altruistic.
I mean, it's sort of a gift that
Iceland's giving the world in a way.
>> Yes. Yeah, it is. A big proportion of
the population is participating.
In most countries, large-scale DNA
studies struggle for volunteers.
In Iceland, over half of the adult
population said yes.
I think there's something really
interesting about an entire population
of people who are willing to be the
petri dish for the world. You know, like
there's a real generosity to that.
Icelanders don't just share a landscape,
they share a bloodline, one vast ongoing
family history.
And I think you can sort of feel
that kindred bond between everyone.
Whatever the hardship, there is an
unspoken solidarity, a collective
determination.
[Music]
But then on top of that, whether it's in
the way that they approach creating
energy or growing food or, you know, in
social issues and how progressive they
are, I think you can really still feel
that sense of them forging their own
path.
And you can sense that that gives rise
to that te te re tus, right? That that
that that sanguine nature that everyone
here has.
And I think when you sum up all of those
bits,
I mean, every country in the world feels
unique.
But I think Iceland is kind of unique in
its uniqueness.